Document the process.env handling and compat flags (#19187)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: src/content/docs/workers/configuration/environment-variables.mdx

Reviewer: Great updates!

<Render file="secrets-in-dev" />

## Environment variables and Node.js compatibility

When you enable both the [`nodejs_compat`](/workers/runtime-apis/nodejs/) and

> [`nodejs_compat_populate_process_env`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/)

Reviewer: You can link to the specific flag using /workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/#flag-name

(As mentioned above you should use Mike's content -with your additions)

> [`nodejs_compat_populate_process_env`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/)

Author: ```suggestion
[`nodejs_compat_populate_process_env`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/#nodejs_compat_populate_process_env)
```

<Render file="env_and_secrets" />

## Environment variables and Node.js compatibility

When using the `nodejs_compat` and `nodejs_compat_populate_process_env` compatibility
flags, environment variables will also be available via the global `process.env`.

Text variable values are exposed directly.

JSON variable values that evaluate to string values are exposed as the parsed value.

JSON variable values that do not evaluate to string values are exposed as the raw
JSON string.

For example, imagine a Worker with three environment variables, one text value, and
two JSON values:

> * `FOO` with plaintext value `abc`,

Reviewer: - Maybe use STRING, JSON_STRING, JSON_OBJECT instead of FOO, BAR and BAZ?
- Users have 2 ways to configure the environment variables: `wrangler.{json|toml}` and the UI. I think we should add the `wrangler.{json|toml}` way here.

Author: I'm not sure that changing the names adds must more information here given that immediately following the names we specify the value types.

* `BAR` with JSON value `"abc"`,

> * `BAZ` with JSON value `"{ "a": 123 }"`

Author: ```suggestion
* `BAZ` with JSON value `"{ "a": 123 }"`

Environment variables can be added using either the `wrangler.{json|toml}` file or via the Cloudflare
dashboard UI.
```

The value of `process.env.FOO` will be the JavaScript string `"abc"`.

The value of `process.env.BAR` will be the JavaScript string `"abc"` (note that the
JSON encoding is removed).

The value of `process.env.BAZ` will be the JSON-encoded string `"{ "a": 123 }"`.

These rules mean that if you have a JSON environment variable whose value is a
JSON-encoded string and you *want* to be able to parse it as JSON within your
application (e.g. `JSON.parse(process.env.BAR)`) then the value will need to
be "double encoded", for instance `'"\\"abc\\""'`.

> Note also that because secrets are a form of environment variable within the runtime,
> secrets are also exposed via `process.env`.

Reviewer: Make that standout:

```suggestion
:::note
Note also that because secrets are a form of environment variable within the runtime,
secrets are also exposed via `process.env`.
```

<img width="569" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/825bc366-ba3d-42b4-8dd2-ff0dd7473d3b" />

<Render file="env_and_secrets" />

> ## Environment variables and Node.js compatibility

Reviewer: I think this section should mention:

1. That `process.env` is populated before any user code runs - i.e. it is available at top level scope
2. That any updates to `process.env` are not reflected on `env`

Author: Point 1 is no longer true with Kenton's more recent change. The `process.env` will be populated lazily on first access.

> When using the `nodejs_compat` and `nodejs_compat_populate_process_env` compatibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you enable both the [`nodejs_compat`](/workers/runtime-apis/nodejs/) and [`nodejs_compat_populate_process_env`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/) compatibility
```

> When you enable both the [`nodejs_compat`](/workers/runtime-apis/nodejs/) and [`nodejs_compat_populate_process_env`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/) compatibility
> flags, environment variables will also be available via the global `process.env`.

Author: ```suggestion
When you enable both the [`nodejs_compat`](/workers/runtime-apis/nodejs/) and
[`nodejs_compat_populate_process_env`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/)
compatibility flags, environment variables will also be available via the global
`process.env`. Note that the `nodejs_compat_populate_process_env` flag is
enabled automatically when `nodejs_compat` is used with a compatibility date
on or after April 1st, 2025.

The `process.env` will be populated lazily the first time that `process` is accessed
in the worker.
```

Text variable values are exposed directly.

JSON variable values that evaluate to string values are exposed as the parsed value.

JSON variable values that do not evaluate to string values are exposed as the raw
JSON string.

For example, imagine a Worker with three environment variables, one text value, and
two JSON values:

> * `FOO` with plaintext value `abc`,

Reviewer 2: Most helpful think we can give reader here is the same format we show here:

https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/configuration/environment-variables/#add-environment-variables-via-wrangler

<img width="750" alt="Screenshot 2025-02-25 at 3 30 06 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/67ffe46b-96cb-4b0a-bc68-c40d58a43624" />

...since that is how they will add environment variables to their own Worker

> * `FOO` with plaintext value `abc`,
> * `BAR` with JSON value `"abc"`,
> * `BAZ` with JSON value `"{ "a": 123 }"`

Author: ````suggestion
```
[vars]
FOO =  "abc"
BAR =  "abc"
BAZ = { "a": 123 }
```
````

> Environment variables can be added using either the `wrangler.{json|toml}` file or via the Cloudflare

Reviewer 2: Think this is covered in section above this one

> Environment variables can be added using either the `wrangler.{json|toml}` file or via the Cloudflare

Reviewer: C3 generates .jsonc
```suggestion
Environment variables can be added using either the `wrangler.{json|jsonc|toml}` file or via the Cloudflare
```

dashboard UI.

The value of `process.env.FOO` will be the JavaScript string `"abc"`.

The value of `process.env.BAR` will be the JavaScript string `"abc"` (note that the
JSON encoding is removed).

The value of `process.env.BAZ` will be the JSON-encoded string `"{ "a": 123 }"`.

These rules mean that if you have a JSON environment variable whose value is a
JSON-encoded string and you *want* to be able to parse it as JSON within your
application (e.g. `JSON.parse(process.env.BAR)`) then the value will need to
be "double encoded", for instance `'"\\"abc\\""'`.

:::note

> Note also that because secrets are a form of environment variable within the runtime,

Reviewer 2: Should have something here: https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/configuration/secrets/

Reviewer: The following should be updated there:

> Secrets are used for storing sensitive information like API keys and auth tokens. Secrets are available on the [env parameter](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/runtime-apis/handlers/fetch/#parameters) passed to your Worker's [fetch event handler](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/runtime-apis/handlers/fetch/).

Reviewer: Have those comments been adressed?

<Render file="env_and_secrets" />

## Environment variables and Node.js compatibility

When you enable both the [`nodejs_compat`](/workers/runtime-apis/nodejs/) and
[`nodejs_compat_populate_process_env`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/)

> compatibility flags, environment variables will also be available via the global
> `process.env`. Note that the `nodejs_compat_populate_process_env` flag is
> enabled automatically when `nodejs_compat` is used with a compatibility date
> on or after April 1st, 2025.

Author: ```suggestion
compatibility flags, and the `disallow_importable_env` compatibility flag is
not set, environment variables will also be available via the global
`process.env`. Note that the `nodejs_compat_populate_process_env` flag is
enabled automatically when `nodejs_compat` is used with a compatibility date
on or after April 1st, 2025.
```

The `process.env` will be populated lazily the first time that `process` is accessed
in the worker.

Text variable values are exposed directly.

> JSON variable values that evaluate to string values are exposed as the parsed value.

Reviewer: I remember that there were changes wrt `.toJson()`, does the description here need to be updated.

Author: No, this is correct. JSON entries that evaluate to a string are exposed as a string.

JSON variable values that do not evaluate to string values are exposed as the raw
JSON string.

For example, imagine a Worker with three environment variables, two text values, and
one JSON value:

```
[vars]
FOO =  "abc"
BAR =  "abc"
BAZ = { "a": 123 }
```

Environment variables can be added using either the `wrangler.{json|jsonc|toml}` file or via the Cloudflare
dashboard UI.

The values of `process.env.FOO` and `process.env.BAR` will each be the
JavaScript string `"abc"`.

> The value of `process.env.BAZ` will be the JSON-encoded string `"{ "a": 123 }"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value of `process.env.BAZ` will be the JSON-encoded string `"{ \"a\": 123 }"`.
```

<Render file="env_and_secrets" />

## Environment variables and Node.js compatibility

When you enable both the [`nodejs_compat`](/workers/runtime-apis/nodejs/) and
[`nodejs_compat_populate_process_env`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-flags/)
compatibility flags, environment variables will also be available via the global
`process.env`. Note that the `nodejs_compat_populate_process_env` flag is
enabled automatically when `nodejs_compat` is used with a compatibility date
on or after April 1st, 2025.

The `process.env` will be populated lazily the first time that `process` is accessed
in the worker.

Text variable values are exposed directly.

JSON variable values that evaluate to string values are exposed as the parsed value.

JSON variable values that do not evaluate to string values are exposed as the raw
JSON string.

> For example, imagine a Worker with three environment variables, one text value, and
> two JSON values:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, imagine a Worker with three environment variables, two text values, and
one JSON value:
```

```
[vars]
FOO =  "abc"
BAR =  "abc"
BAZ = { "a": 123 }
```

Environment variables can be added using either the `wrangler.{json|jsonc|toml}` file or via the Cloudflare
dashboard UI.

> The value of `process.env.FOO` will be the JavaScript string `"abc"`.
> 
> The value of `process.env.BAR` will be the JavaScript string `"abc"` (note that the
> JSON encoding is removed).

Author: ```suggestion
The values of `process.env.FOO` and `process.env.BAR` will each be the
JavaScript string `"abc"`.
```

The value of `process.env.BAZ` will be the JSON-encoded string `"{ "a": 123 }"`.

> These rules mean that if you have a JSON environment variable whose value is a
> JSON-encoded string and you *want* to be able to parse it as JSON within your
> application (e.g. `JSON.parse(process.env.BAR)`) then the value will need to
> be "double encoded", for instance `'"\\"abc\\""'`.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
